Anguisher
Medium aberration, chaotic evil
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 65 (10d8 + 20)
Speed 30 ft.
STR
8 (–1)
DEX
14 (+2)
CON
15 (+2)
INT
8 (–1)
WIS
10 (+0)
CHA
17 (+3)
Skills Insight +2, Perception +2, Stealth +4
Damage Resistances psychic; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from nonmagical attacks
Condition Immunities exhaustion, frightened, grappled, paralyzed, petrified, prone, restrained, unconscious
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages understands all languages but can’t speak, telepathy 60 ft.
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP)
Proficiency Bonus +2
Amorphous. The anguisher can move through a space as narrow as 1 inch wide without squeezing.
Continued Suffering. A creature that has an Intelligence score of 4 or higher and dies from an anguisher’s attacks spawns a new anguisher in 3 days. Any effect that prevents the body from becoming undead also prevents the emergence of the new anguisher.
Frightening Advantage. The anguisher has advantage on attack rolls against creatures that are frightened. Against such targets, the anguisher scores a critical hit on a roll of 18 to 20.
aCtiOns
Multiattack. The anguisher uses anguish twice.
Anguish. Melee or Ranged Spell Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft. or range 60 ft., one creature. Hit: 13 (3d6 + 3) psychic damage, and the target is frightened of the anguisher and must use its reaction to move its speed away by the safest possible route. Movement used during this reaction can’t be used during the target’s turn.
Harrow (Recharge 6). Each creature of the anguisher’s choice within 60 feet and aware of the anguisher must make a DC 13 Wisdom saving throw. On a failure, a creature takes 17 (5d6) psychic damage and becomes frightened for 1 minute. If the save succeeds, the creature takes half the damage and isn’t frightened. A frightened creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the condition on itself on a success.
Invisibility. The anguisher magically turns invisible until it attacks or until its concentration ends (as if concentrating on a spell).